WARRANTY

The VISTA program and its documentation are provided ``as is'' without
warranty of any kind, to the extent permitted by applicable state and
federal laws.  The entire risk as to the results and performance of the
program is assumed by you.  Should the program prove defective, you (and
not the authors of the programs and/or other parties providing VISTA)
assume the entire cost of all necessary servicing, repair, or corrections.
Further, neither the authors of the programs nor any other parties
providing VISTA warrant, guarantee, or make any representations regarding
use of, or the results of the use of, the programs comprising the VISTA
program in terms of correctness, accuracy, reliability, currentness, or
otherwise; and you rely on the programs and their results solely at your
own risk.

In no event unless required by applicable law will anyone who has been
involved in the creation, production, or delivery of this program package
and its documentation be liable for any direct, indirect, consequential, or
incidental damages arising out of the use, the results of use, or inability
to use this product (including but not limited to loss of data or data
being rendered inaccurate or losses sustained by third parties or a failure
of the programs to operate with programs not distributed by [the people who
distribute VISTA, NMSU?]), even if any individuals involved in the creation,
production, or delivery of this program package, have been advised of the
possibility of such damages or claim.


